---
title: 1. MAN CREATED IN THE IMAGE OF GOD.
description: 
---

The state of integrity is the original condition of man. Man was created after the image of God, in wisdom, holiness, and righteousness. The state of integrity is proved in Scripture a) by God's general verdict "very good," Gen. 1, 31, and b) by the special statement that God made man in His image, Gen. 1, 26. 27. For all practical purposes the designations image, צלם and likeness, דְּמוּת, may be treated as synonyms. Luther: "ein Bild, das uns gleich sei"; Baier: "imago simillima."

In his original state man bore a resemblance to God because He Himself was the pattern, or archetype, after which man was made. According to Scripture, Adam was created after the likeness of the Triune God, Gen. 1, 26, and not after that of Christ alone (the error of Osiander).

## The rest of chap. 9 a

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-man/a.man-before-the-fall/definition-of-image-of-god"}
2. Definition of image of God
::

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-man/a.man-before-the-fall/the-relation-of-the-divine-image-to-the-nature-of-man"}
3. The relation of the divine image to the nature of man
::

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-man/a.man-before-the-fall/immediate-results-of-the-divine-image"}
4. Immediate results of the divine image
::

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-man/a.man-before-the-fall/the-divine-image-and-woman"}
5. The divine image and woman
::

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-man/a.man-before-the-fall/the-ultimate-end-of-the-image-of-god-in-man"}
6. The ultimate end of the image of God in man
::
