---
title: 1. DEFINITION OF THE TERM.
description: De Mediis Gratiae.
---

In order to offer and convey to men the merits which Christ has secured for the world by His death on the cross, [2 Cor. 5, 21](https://biblehub.com/crossref/2_corinthians/5-21.htm){:target="_blank" title="For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God."}; [Rom. 5, 18](https://biblehub.com/crossref/romans/5-18.htm){:target="_blank" title="Therefore, as one trespass led to condemnation for all men, so one act of righteousnessg leads to justification and life for all men."}, God employs certain external, visible means through which the Holy Spirit works and preserves faith and thus accomplishes the sinner's salvation.

That is the clear teaching of our Confessions. The Formula of Concord thus writes [XI, 76](https://boc.confident.faith/sd-xi-0076){:target="_blank"}: _"The Father will not do this [draw any one to Himself] without means, but has ordained for this purpose His Word and Sacraments as ordinary means and instruments."_ The Smalcald Articles [Part III, Art. VIII, 3](https://boc.confident.faith/sa-iii-viii-0003){:target="_blank"}: _"In those things which concern the spoken, outward Word we must firmly hold that God grants His Spirit or grace to no one except through or with the preceding outward Word."_ The Augsburg Confession [Art. V, 2](https://boc.confident.faith/ac-v-0004){:target="_blank"}: _"They [our churches] condemn the Anabaptists and others who think that the Holy Ghost comes to men without the external Word, through their own preparations and works."_

Our dogmaticians define the means of grace as _"media externa a Deo ordinata, quibus Deus gratiam a Christo acquisitam hominibus offert et fidem ad gratiam accipiendam necessariam in hominibus efficit et conservat."_ As divinely ordained means of grace they acknowledge, on the basis of Scripture, only the Word (the Gospel)[^1] and the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, the latter two as the visible Word (_Verbum visibile_).

According to Scripture these divinely ordained means have a twofold function or power, namely, `a)` an exhibiting, offering, or conferring power _(vis exhibitiva, dativa, collativa)_ and `b)` an effective, or operative, power _(vis effectiva sive operativa)_. `The first` consists in this, that the Holy Spirit through the means of grace earnestly offers to those who hear or read the Word the grace of God (Dei favor) and the righteousness of Christ _(meritum Christi)_; `the second`, that He through the means of grace actually works, strengthens, and preserves in the hearts of men a living faith in the gracious forgiveness of their sins, so that they are converted, justified, sanctified, and finally glorified. For this reason we rightly call the means of grace [media communicationis remissionis peccatorum sive iustificationis ex parte Dei](https://translate.google.com.ph/?sl=auto&tl=en&text=media%20communicationis%20remissionis%20peccatorum%20sive%20iustificationis%20ex%20parte%20Dei&op=translate){:target="_blank" title="means of communicating the forgiveness of sins or justification on the part of God."}.

This doctrine of the means of grace the conceited reason of man has corrupted in a twofold manner. On the one hand, it has declared that means of grace are unnecessary for salvation (Zwinglianism: The Holy Spirit requires no wagon [vehiculum] for His divine operations); and, on the other, it has added to the two Sacraments ordained by Christ additional sacraments (Romanism: penance, confirmation, marriage, the ordination of priests, extreme unction). In the final analysis every perversion of the doctrine of the means of grace is made in the interest of the doctrine of work-righteousness.

## The rest of chap. 19

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-the-means-of-grace/the-means-of-grace-in-general"}
2. The means of grace in general
::

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-the-means-of-grace/erroneous-doctrines-regarding-the-means-of-grace"}
3. Erroneous doctrines regarding the means of grace
::

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-the-means-of-grace/the-importance-of-the-doctrine-of-the-means-of-grace"}
4. The importance of the doctrine of the means of grace
::

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-the-means-of-grace/the-means-of-grace-in-the-form-of-absolution"}
5. The means of grace in the form of absolution
::

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-the-means-of-grace/the-means-of-grace-in-the-old-testament"}
6. The means of grace in the old testament
::

::callout{color="neutral" to="/the-doctrine-of-the-means-of-grace/the-means-of-grace-and-prayer"}
7. The means of grace and prayer
::

[^1]: The reformed don't distinguish between the law and the gospel, in relation to _the means of grace_, in opposite to most of the lutherans. [Cf. Google AI short summary.](https://share.google/aimode/vWZYauHh1UTWp6FwE){:target="_blank" title="In the Reformed tradition, the Word of God as a means of grace is generally understood in a broad sense, encompassing both the Law and the Gospel, each with its own specific function"}
